NBCR-2024-001: Create a new paper to define the Unique Asset ID (UAI) (#5)
ngraveio/Research: papers/nbcr-2024-001-unique-asset-id.md

# Unique Asset ID (UAI) format
## NBCR-2024-001

**© 2024 Ngrave**

Authors: İrfan Bilaloğlu, Mathieu Da Silva, Maher Sallam<br/>
Date: 18 September 2024<br/>

---

### Introduction

By uniquely identifying an asset, the watch-only wallets and the offline signers are able to request the asset price and its logo, as well as to identify the protocol to derive addresses and to prepare transactions. Currently, many wallets are based on their homemade enumeration. 

We propose a new URI format, named *Unique Asset ID (UAI)*, to standardize the asset identification. 

### UAI format 

> The UAI format is based on following URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UAI format is based on the following URL:
```

>  **`uai://curve.type[.subtype1.subtype2]:tokenid[.subtype1.subtype2]/purpose/coin_type/account/change/address_index`**

Reviewer: Maybe it's clearer and more concise to just call the `purpose/coin_type/account/change/address_index` part here `bip44_derivation_path` or just `derivation_path`? In the description below we can mention that it doesn't include the `m/` prefix.

Author: Indeed good suggestion!

This format uses the reverse DNS notation because it groups closely related coins when sorting them lexically.

> Using an URL format presents several benefits. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using a URL format presents several benefits. 
```

> 1. URL parsers exist in standard libraries in all languages. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. URL parsers exist in the standard libraries of many languages. 
```

Rust for example doesn't have a parser in its standard library (but there is a `crate` for it of course).

| P-521                    | 3                               | EC2      | NIST P-521 also known as secp521r1 |                   | [RFC9053] | Yes         |
| X25519                   | 4                               | OKP      | X25519 for use w/ ECDH only        |                   | [RFC9053] | Yes         |
| X448                     | 5                               | OKP      | X448 for use w/ ECDH only          |                   | [RFC9053] | Yes         |
| Ed25519                  | 6                               | OKP      | Ed25519 for use w/ EdDSA only      |                   | [RFC9053] | Yes         |
| Ed448                    | 7                               | OKP      | Ed448 for use w/ EdDSA only        |                   | [RFC9053] | Yes         |
| secp256k1                | 8                               | EC2      | SECG secp256k1 curve               | IESG              | [RFC8812] | No          |

2. **`type`** field carries the coin type information as defined in [[SLIP44]](https://github.com/satoshilabs/slips/blob/master/slip-0044.md) with the high bit turned off.    

> In case of additional information required to identify the asset, the sub-type **`type[.subtype1.subtype2]`** fields have to be defined. For example, every EVM chains require the additional chain ID as identifier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case additional information is required to identify the asset, the sub-type **`type[.subtype1.subtype2]`** fields must  be defined. For example, every EVM chain requires the additional chain ID as an identifier.
```

The other fields are ***optional*** and defined as follow: 

3. **`tokenid`** field carries the token information. For example, ERC20 tokens are identified through the token address and MultiversX tokens using their token identifier.   
For ERC721 and ERC1155 tokens, the token identifier is the combination of a contract address and a token ID. In this case, the sub-type **`tokenid[.subtype1.subtype2]`** fields will be used to specify the token ID associated to the contract address. 

5. **`derivation_path`** field carries the derivation path to indicate the account related to the asset.     

> The derivation path is specified by `purpose/coin_type/account/change/address_index` format, without the `m/` prefix used in regular notation. Besides, the hardened paths in the derivation paths will be indicated using the letter `h`.

Reviewer 2: Once we include the derivation path, it is no longer related to the **asset** it is a relation of the asset to wallet.

If we are going to include derivation path I also suggest to put _master fingerprint_ since its used by wallets to make a connection of asset to account.

### Examples

The following table provides several examples to identify a coin with only the required information:

| Asset | UAI |
| --- | --- |
| Bitcoin (BTC) | uai://secp256k1.0 |
| Ethereum (ETH) | uai://secp256k1.60.1 |
| Polygon (POL) | uai://secp256k1.60.137 |
| Solana (SOL) | uai://ed25519.508 |
| Tezos (XTZ) based on ed25519 | uai://ed25519.1729 |
| Tezos (XTZ) based on secp256k1 | uai://secp256k1.1729 |
| Neo | uai://p256.888 |
| Polkadot | uai://x25519.354 |

The following table provides additional examples to identify some specific assets on a blockchain using the optional fields:

| Asset | UAI |
| ---------------- | --- |
| Bitcoin (BTC) Taproot accounts | uai://secp256k1.0/86h/0h/0h |
| USDC on Polygon | uai://secp256k1.60.137:0x3c499c542cEF5E3811e1192ce70d8cC03d5c3359 |

> | USDC on Solana | bc-coin://ed25519.501:EPjFWdd5AufqSSqeM2qN1xzybapC8G4wEGGkZwyTDt1v |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| USDC on Solana | uai://ed25519.501:EPjFWdd5AufqSSqeM2qN1xzybapC8G4wEGGkZwyTDt1v |
```

> | USDC on MultiversX | bc-coin://ed25519.508:USDC-c76f1f |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| USDC on MultiversX | uai://ed25519.508:USDC-c76f1f |
```

> | [NFT](https://etherscan.io/nft/0x495f947276749ce646f68ac8c248420045cb7b5e/30215980622330187411918288900688501299580125367569939549692495859506871271425) on Ethereum | bc-coin://secp256k1.60.1:0x495f947276749Ce646f68AC8c248420045cb7b5e. 30215980622330187411918288900688501299580125367569939549692495859506871271425 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [NFT](https://etherscan.io/nft/0x495f947276749ce646f68ac8c248420045cb7b5e/30215980622330187411918288900688501299580125367569939549692495859506871271425) on Ethereum | uai://secp256k1.60.1:0x495f947276749Ce646f68AC8c248420045cb7b5e.30215980622330187411918288900688501299580125367569939549692495859506871271425 |
```

> | USDC on Ethereum account n°2 | bc-coin://secp256k1.60.1:0xa0b86991c6218b36c1d19d4a2e9eb0ce3606eb48/44h/60h/0h/0/0/1 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| USDC on Ethereum account n°2 | uai://secp256k1.60.1:0xa0b86991c6218b36c1d19d4a2e9eb0ce3606eb48/44h/60h/0h/0/0/1 |
```

### UAI format/UR types conversion

> The UAI format and the UR types defined in [[NBCR-2023-001]](https://github.com/ngraveio/Research/blob/main/papers/nbcr-2023-001-coin-identity.md) and [[NBCR-2023-002]](https://github.com/ngraveio/Research/blob/main/papers/nbcr-2023-002-multi-layer-sync.md) share the same information. While UAI format is human readable and designed to be used internally by the wallets (for both offline signers and watch-only wallets), UR types are a compact format designed for efficient communication between an offline signer and a watch-only wallet.

Reviewer: I can see the UAI being used externally between wallets or between a website an a native mobile app to link to unique crypto assets.

> The UR types and the UAI format can be easily convertible to each other:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The UR types and the UAI format can easily be converted to each other:
```

# Unique Asset ID (UAI) format
## NBCR-2024-001

**© 2024 Ngrave**

Authors: İrfan Bilaloğlu, Mathieu Da Silva, Maher Sallam<br/>
Date: 18 September 2024<br/>

---

### Introduction

By uniquely identifying an asset, the watch-only wallets and the offline signers are able to request the asset price and its logo, as well as to identify the protocol to derive addresses and to prepare transactions. Currently, many wallets are based on their homemade enumeration. 

We propose a new URI format, named *Unique Asset ID (UAI)*, to standardize the asset identification. 

### UAI format 

The UAI format is based on the following URL:

>  **`uai://curve.type[.subtype1.subtype2]:tokenid[.subtype1.subtype2]/derivation_path?master_fingerprint=uint32`**

Reviewer 2: If we are going to link accounts, we should also include publickeys, or addresses as optional parameters so the wallets would know which address to connect to.

Or we can only use this to identify `assets` usd, gold, usdt

Author: Discussed during our sync as well, we need to better identify the use cases for the UAI format in order to improve its format. 
For the scope of this PR, we are just trying to improve the current coin definition by solving some ambiguities and by linking the UAI to UR types.
